

THE JAVA PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE


Java is a general-purpose computer programming language that is
concurrent, class-based, object-oriented, and specifically
designed to have as few implementation dependencies as possible.

One design goal of Java is portability, which means that programs
written for the Java platform must run similarly on any combination
of hardware and operating system with adequate runtime support.
This is achieved by compiling the Java language code to an
intermediate representation called Java bytecode, instead of
directly to architecture-specific machine code. Java bytecode
instructions are analogous to machine code, but they are intended
to be executed by a virtual machine (VM) written specifically for
the host hardware. End users commonly use a Java Runtime Environment
(JRE) installed on their own machine for standalone Java
applications, or in a web browser for Java applets.

Standard libraries provide a generic way to access host-specific
features such as graphics, threading, and networking.

The use of universal bytecode makes porting simple. However, the
overhead of interpreting bytecode into machine instructions made
interpreted programs almost always run more slowly than native
executables. Just-in-time (JIT) compilers that compile bytecodes to
machine code during runtime were introduced from an early stage.
Oracle Corporation is the current owner of the official
implementation of the Java SE platform, following their acquisition
of Sun Microsystems on January 27, 2010. This implementation is
based on the original implementation of Java by Sun. The Oracle
implementation is available for Microsoft Windows (still works for
XP, while only later versions currently officially supported),
macOS, Linux, and Solaris. Because Java lacks any formal
standardization recognized by Ecma International, ISO/IEC, ANSI, or
other third-party standards organization, the Oracle implementation
is the de facto standard.

The Oracle implementation is packaged into two different
distributions: The Java Runtime Environment (JRE) which contains
the parts of the Java SE platform required to run Java programs and
is intended for end users, and the Java Development Kit (JDK),
which is intended for software developers and includes development
tools such as the Java compiler, Javadoc, Jar, and a debugger.

OpenJDK is another notable Java SE implementation that is licensed
under the GNU GPL. The implementation started when Sun began
releasing the Java source code under the GPL. As of Java SE 7,
OpenJDK is the official Java reference implementation.
